The year 1144 of the Age of Exiles, Hound Moon.
There it is fell through the night air, waitless.
He caught glimpses of the tower of Brickhan.
Caledus is still smoldering outline at the window, then below, the river coming up to meet him.
He slammed into the water, the cold shocking the breath out of him.
He panicked, disorientated, realizing he didn't know which way was up.
All about him was darkness and ice.
Then something grabbed his hair, and he was surging upwards, breaking through the water
in a burst of spray, and saw Alsion's pale broad phase staring back at him.
"They will come hunting for us," the giant shouted over the roar of the river, as the
current gripped them, sweeping them away from the thunder of warriors' feet crossing the
bridge.
"Let the water take us far from them."
Caledus saw the sense of that, though his hands and feet were already numbing from the
cold.
He put some effort into swimming, speeding his way from Brickhan, from Caledus, from the
Khadashim.
The thought still jolted him like a blow.
They turned a bend in the river, and the fortress was gone, darkness enfolding them.
The soft weak sheen of dawn's gray light filtered down through the lattice of branches above,
his varidus met Alsion's gaze, an unspoken agreement passing between them, as they both
headed for the riverbank.
It was harder going, swimming across the current, and varidus realized how exhausted his body
was, but eventually he felt silt beneath his feet, his hands grasping at reeds as he pulled
himself out of the water and flopped onto his back, gasping, his limbs feeling lead-filled.
Turning, he saw Alsion on the bank, thirty or forty paces upriver from him, staggering
wearily towards him before he slumped down beside him with a groan, water dripping from
his drooping moustache.
"Thank you," Alsion said.
"For what?"
"Everything, most of all, for helping my family escape Brickhan's dungeons."
His wife and bear.
How long has he gone without seeing them?
And what must he have suffered, knowing they were Caledus and Lycus' prisoners?
And for destroying Caledus' effigy of me, Alsion continued, "You have set me free."
He gave a shudder, followed by a smile, "A shadow is gone from my soul.
I feel reborn."
"If you mean you feel weak as a newborn bear," Veridis muttered as he emptied his boot of
water and tried to pull it back on, "then I feel the same."
"That is not what I mean," the giant rumbled, regarding Veridis' with serious eyes.
"You set rainer and tame free, you set me free.
I owe you a debt beyond all imagining."
"You're in no debt to me," Veridis said.
"I kicked the effigies into the fire on impulse, not really knowing what they were, or what
power they held over you."
But you suspected, "I," something that Fidele said.
He thought of Nathair's mother, hoped that she had made it to freedom along with his
brother, Kralis, Maken and Albin.
And your wife and son, I set them free because it was the right thing to do.
It was not the choice.
"Ah, but there was true heart, there always is."
Veridis shrugged.
"There is no debt between us.
You are my friend."
One of my only friends, it has turned out.
His thought swept bitterly to Nathair, and the confession and revelations that had stunned
Veridis.
He remembered Calidus' confession, that Nathair had slain Aquilus, his own father.
Anger and shame twisted through him.
"There have been so many signs.
How can I have been deceived for so long?
I am a fool."
"How long?"